.Dd May 11, 2026
.Dt NOBODY-TRACE 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nobody-trace
.Nd JSONL trace format for nobody runs
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Xr nobody 1
writes newline-delimited JSON events to the configured trace path.
The default path is
.Pa .nobody/runs/latest.jsonl .
.Pp
Trace files are append-only by convention in the current prototype.
They are not sealed, signed, replayable, or protected against local
modification.
.Sh EVENT FORMAT
Each line is one JSON object with these fields:
.Bl -tag -width "parent_event_id"
.It Va schema_version
Trace schema identifier.
The current writer emits
.Qq nobody.trace.v1 .
.It Va run_id
Runtime-generated run identifier.
.It Va event_id
Event identifier within the run.
.It Va parent_event_id
Optional parent event identifier.
Currently null.
.It Va ts_ms
Unix timestamp in milliseconds.
.It Va actor
Object identifying the event writer.
The current writer uses
.Qq runtime
and
.Qq local .
.It Va kind
Event name.
.It Va decision
Optional policy decision summary.
.It Va data
Event-specific payload.
.El
.Sh DECISION SUMMARY
Decision events include a
.Va decision
object with:
.Bl -tag -width "matched_pattern" -compact
.It Va decision
.Qq allow ,
.Qq deny ,
or
.Qq ask .
.It Va rule_id
Matched policy rule, such as
.Qq process.allow .
.It Va resource
Structured resource object.
.It Va action
Action kind, such as
.Qq process_exec .
.It Va matched_pattern
Policy pattern that matched, if any.
.It Va message
Human-readable reason.
.El
.Sh EVENT KINDS
.Bl -tag -width "process.exec.allow"
.It Va run.created
Records the requested command in
.Va data.command .
.It Va policy.loaded
Records the policy path and selected trace path.
.It Va process.exec.allow
Records an allowed process decision before spawn.
.It Va process.exec.deny
Records a denied process decision before spawn.
.It Va env.filtered
Records
.Va clear ,
.Va allowed_count ,
.Va denied_count ,
and the allowed and denied variable names.
Values are not recorded.
.It Va sandbox.prepared
Records the sandbox backend, whether it is enforced, and any warning.
.It Va sandbox.prepare.failed
Records a sandbox preparation failure before spawn.
.It Va mcp.proxy.created
Records MCP proxy configuration for a run.
.It Va mcp.proxy.started
Records MCP server process start.
.It Va mcp.tool.allow , mcp.tool.deny , mcp.tool.ask
Records an MCP tool-call decision.
The event records server, tool, and request id, but not tool arguments.
.It Va mcp.proxy.exited
Records MCP server process exit status.
.It Va process.started
Records the spawned program and process id.
.It Va process.start.failed
Records a spawn failure before the child process starts.
.It Va process.exited
Records the child process exit code and success flag.
.It Va run.completed
Records the final run exit code and success flag.
Denied setup paths and sandbox preparation failures are also recorded as
completed failed runs with
.Va success=false
and a machine-readable reason.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa .nobody/runs/latest.jsonl
Default trace path.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal
{"schema_version":"nobody.trace.v1","run_id":"run-1760000000000-1","event_id":"evt-1","parent_event_id":null,"ts_ms":1760000000000,"actor":{"kind":"runtime","id":"local"},"kind":"run.created","decision":null,"data":{"command":["echo","hello"]}}
.Ed
.Pp
Show the latest run in a compact terminal view:
.Bd -literal
nobody trace show latest
.Ed
.Pp
Show the latest run as JSONL:
.Bd -literal
nobody trace show latest --jsonl
.Ed
.Pp
Explain the latest run as a summary and readable timeline:
.Bd -literal
nobody trace explain latest
.Ed
.Pp
The explanation includes the command, policy path, sandbox backend, duration,
exit status, and timeline entries such as:
.Bd -literal
process.exec ALLOW cargo test rule=process.rule.allow_args
env.filtered allowed=7 denied=42
sandbox.prepared backend=landlock enforced=true
sandbox.prepared backend=landlock+netns enforced=true fs=true net=true network_mode=deny-all
mcp.tool ALLOW github/issue.read rule=mcp.allow_tools
.Ed
.Sh STABILITY
The
.Qq nobody.trace.v1
schema is the current local schema.
Readers should ignore unknown fields and preserve unrecognized event kinds.
.Pp
The bundled reader also accepts older minimal trace lines and exposes them as
.Qq nobody.trace.legacy
events for display.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr nobody 1 ,
.Xr nobody.toml 5 ,
.Xr nobody-policy 7
