.Dd May 11, 2026
.Dt NOBODY-POLICY 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nobody-policy
.Nd capability model for nobody
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Xr nobody 1
turns ambient authority into declared capabilities.
A policy describes which resources an agent may use before the runtime starts
work, and the runtime records its decisions in a trace.
.Pp
The model is intentionally small:
.Bl -tag -width "decision" -compact
.It Em action
Something the subject wants to do, such as executing a process or reading a
file.
.It Em resource
The object named by the action, such as a path, host, process, or environment
variable.
.It Em decision
The policy result:
.Qq allow ,
.Qq deny ,
or the reserved
.Qq ask .
.El
.Sh PRECEDENCE
Explicit deny rules win over allow rules.
When an allow list is non-empty, unmatched resources are denied for that
capability.
The current approval model is parsed but not yet used to pause for interactive
approval.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Cm nobody policy check
parses a policy and reports its process, filesystem, environment, and trace
shape.
It also emits warnings for policy declarations that are likely to surprise an
operator.
.Pp
Current warnings include risky legacy process allows, such as
.Qq python
or
.Qq sh
without a matching
.Va [[process.rule]] ,
and Linux Landlock deny carve-outs underneath granted filesystem trees.
.Sh CAPABILITIES
.Ss Process
Process policy controls the initial command requested through
.Cm nobody run .
The runtime checks
.Va process.deny
and
.Va process.allow
before spawning the command.
.Va [[process.rule]]
adds argument-aware rules for conservative argv forms such as
.Qq cargo test ,
.Qq cargo check ,
.Qq python -m pytest ,
and
.Qq git status .
.Pp
Risky forms such as
.Qq python -c ,
.Qq sh -c ,
.Qq bash -lc ,
and
.Qq git config --global
are denied unless an explicit argument rule allows them.
.Pp
This is not yet a full process-tree execution monitor.
Use filesystem sandboxing and narrow command allow lists together.
.Ss Environment
Environment policy controls which inherited variables reach the child process.
When
.Va env.clear
is true, only allowed and non-denied names are re-added.
When false, the environment is inherited except for denied names.
.Pp
Trace events record environment names and counts, not values.
.Ss Filesystem
Filesystem policy names readable, writable, and denied paths.
Policy simulation explains decisions for individual
.Cm fs.read
and
.Cm fs.write
actions.
.Pp
On Linux, the runtime attempts to translate read and write grants into a
Landlock boundary for the child process.
On other platforms, filesystem policy remains diagnostic.
See
.Xr nobody-sandbox 7
for backend details.
.Ss Network
Network policy names hosts or endpoints that would be allowed or denied.
The current runtime can simulate
.Cm net.connect
decisions.
On Linux, a policy with
.Va net.deny
containing
.Qq *
requests a fresh network namespace before exec and denies all host egress for
the child process and its descendants.
Host allowlists remain diagnostic until a later egress proxy or namespace
bridge exists.
.Ss MCP and Tools
MCP tool policy is enforced for stdio traffic routed through
.Cm nobody mcp proxy .
The policy lives under server-specific tables such as
.Va [mcp.github] .
.Va deny_tools
wins over rules and allow lists, and unmatched tools are denied.
.Pp
Traffic that is not routed through
.Cm nobody mcp proxy
is outside this enforcement path.
.Ss Secrets
Secrets are currently handled indirectly through filesystem denies and
environment filtering.
There is not yet a dedicated secret broker.
.Ss Approvals
Approval requirements are parsed for schema stability.
The current runtime does not yet emit pending approval requests or wait for a
human decision.
.Ss Trace
Trace output is the audit surface.
Every run records lifecycle events, the process decision, environment filtering
summary, sandbox backend status, and exit status.
.Sh CURRENT GUARANTEES
The current runtime enforces:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
the requested process decision, including argument-aware process rules, before
spawn;
.It
environment filtering before spawn;
.It
Linux filesystem path grants when Landlock can fully enforce them.
.El
.Pp
The current runtime records, but does not fully enforce:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
network decisions;
.It
filesystem decisions on non-Linux hosts;
.It
future approval, MCP, browser, and secret-broker concepts.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr nobody 1 ,
.Xr nobody-trace 5 ,
.Xr nobody.toml 5 ,
.Xr nobody-sandbox 7
