.Dd May 11, 2026
.Dt NOBODY.TOML 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nobody.toml
.Nd policy file format for nobody
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is the TOML policy format read by
.Xr nobody 1 .
The file declares the capabilities available to a run: process execution,
environment inheritance, filesystem grants, network diagnostics, approval
requirements, and trace output.
.Pp
Unknown tables or fields are rejected.
Missing tables use conservative empty defaults, except where noted below.
.Sh TABLES
.Ss agent
Optional descriptive metadata.
.Bl -tag -width "description" -compact
.It Va name
Agent name.
.It Va kind
Agent kind, such as
.Qq local-cli .
.It Va description
Free-form description.
.El
.Pp
These fields are parsed but not enforced.
.Ss task
Optional task metadata.
.Bl -tag -width "max_duration" -compact
.It Va id
Task identifier.
.It Va repo
Repository path.
.It Va max_duration
Duration string reserved for future time limits.
.El
.Pp
These fields are parsed but not enforced.
.Ss fs
Filesystem capability policy.
.Bl -tag -width "write" -compact
.It Va read
Array of readable path grants.
.It Va write
Array of writable path grants.
.It Va deny
Array of denied paths.
.El
.Pp
Policy simulation normalizes paths lexically before matching, so
.Pa ./src/../.env
is evaluated as
.Pa .env .
Patterns beginning with
.Pa ~/
are compared against the current
.Ev HOME
path as well as the literal policy text.
.Pp
.Va fs.deny
wins over
.Va fs.read
and
.Va fs.write
for policy decisions.
On Linux, Landlock enforcement can only represent allowlisted path trees.
If a deny path sits underneath an already-granted path,
.Nm nobody
fails closed instead of pretending the carve-out is enforced.
.Ss net
Network capability policy.
.Bl -tag -width "mode" -compact
.It Va mode
Network default mode.
The documented mode is
.Qq deny-by-default ,
which is also the default when the field is omitted.
.It Va allow
Array of allowed host or
.Ar host:port
patterns.
.It Va deny
Array of denied host or
.Ar host:port
patterns.
.El
.Pp
Network decisions are currently diagnostic.
Traffic is not blocked by the runtime yet.
Explicit deny rules win.
With
.Va mode
set to
.Qq deny-by-default ,
or with a non-empty
.Va allow
list, endpoints must match
.Va net.allow .
.Ss process
Process execution policy.
.Bl -tag -width "allow" -compact
.It Va allow
Array of allowed program names.
.It Va deny
Array of denied program names.
.It Va rule
Array of argument-aware process rule tables, written as
.Va [[process.rule]] .
.El
.Pp
.Va process.deny
always wins.
If
.Va process.allow
is empty, processes are allowed unless denied.
If it is non-empty, the requested program must match it.
Commands match either the exact program string or its basename, so
.Qq git
matches both
.Qq git
and
.Pa /usr/bin/git .
.Pp
A
.Va [[process.rule]]
table has a required
.Va program
field and optional
.Va allow_args ,
.Va deny_args ,
and
.Va decision
fields.
.Va allow_args
and
.Va deny_args
are arrays of strings.
If any value starts with
.Ql - ,
the array is treated as an argv prefix.
Otherwise the array is treated as allowed or denied first arguments.
.Pp
.Va deny_args
wins over
.Va allow_args .
A rule with
.Va allow_args
constrains that program; non-matching argv is denied.
The optional
.Va decision
field may be
.Qq allow ,
.Qq deny ,
or
.Qq ask .
Ask decisions fail closed until approval gates are implemented.
.Pp
Risky interpreter and credential-changing forms are denied unless an explicit
argument rule allows them.
This includes
.Qq python -c ,
.Qq sh -c ,
.Qq bash -c ,
.Qq bash -lc ,
and
.Qq git config --global .
.Ss env
Environment inheritance policy.
.Bl -tag -width "clear" -compact
.It Va clear
Boolean.
Defaults to false.
When true, the child environment starts empty.
.It Va allow
Array of allowed variable-name patterns.
Used when
.Va clear
is true.
.It Va deny
Array of denied variable-name patterns.
.El
.Pp
.Va env.deny
wins over
.Va env.allow .
If
.Va clear
is false, variables are inherited unless they match
.Va env.deny .
Trace events record variable names and counts, but not values.
.Ss approval
Approval policy.
.Bl -tag -width "require" -compact
.It Va require
Array of approval gate names.
.El
.Pp
Approval fields are parsed for schema stability.
The current runtime does not stop for interactive approval.
.Ss trace
Trace output policy.
.Bl -tag -width "redact" -compact
.It Va path
JSONL trace path.
Defaults to
.Pa .nobody/runs/latest.jsonl .
.It Va redact
Array of redaction patterns reserved for trace and broker integrations.
.El
.Pp
The current trace writer avoids recording environment values.
.Va trace.redact
is parsed but is not a general-purpose output scrubber yet.
.Sh PATTERNS
.Nm
supports simple asterisk wildcards in environment, network, and path matching.
An asterisk matches any substring.
There is no support for question-mark wildcards, character classes, brace
expansion, or shell evaluation.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa nobody.toml
Default policy path.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal
[fs]
read = ["./Cargo.toml", "./Cargo.lock", "./crates", "./docs", "./man"]
write = ["./Cargo.toml", "./Cargo.lock", "./README.md", "./crates", "./docs", "./man"]
deny = [".env", "~/.ssh", "~/.aws"]

[net]
mode = "deny-by-default"
allow = ["github.com:443", "api.anthropic.com:443"]
deny = []

[process]
allow = ["echo", "git", "cargo", "rustc"]
deny = ["rm", "curl", "scp", "ssh"]

[[process.rule]]
program = "cargo"
allow_args = ["test", "check", "build"]

[[process.rule]]
program = "python"
allow_args = ["-m", "pytest"]

[[process.rule]]
program = "git"
allow_args = ["status", "diff", "log", "show", "add", "commit"]

[env]
clear = true
allow = ["PATH", "HOME", "USER", "LOGNAME", "LANG", "TERM", "SHELL"]
deny = ["*TOKEN*", "*KEY*", "AWS_*", "DATABASE_URL", "SSH_AUTH_SOCK"]

[trace]
path = ".nobody/runs/latest.jsonl"
redact = ["*TOKEN*", "*KEY*", "Authorization"]
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr nobody 1 ,
.Xr nobody-trace 5 ,
.Xr nobody-policy 7 ,
.Xr nobody-sandbox 7
