.Dd May 11, 2026
.Dt NOBODY 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nobody
.Nd run agents without ambient authority
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Cm doctor
.Op Fl p Ar policy
.Nm
.Cm init
.Op Fl -profile Ar name
.Op Fl o Ar output
.Op Fl -force
.Nm
.Cm init
.Fl -list-profiles
.Nm
.Cm mcp proxy
.Ar server
.Op Fl p Ar policy
.Fl -
.Ar command
.Op Ar argument ...
.Nm
.Cm run
.Op Fl p Ar policy
.Fl -
.Ar command
.Op Ar argument ...
.Nm
.Cm policy check
.Op Ar policy
.Nm
.Cm policy simulate
.Op Ar policy
.Fl -
.Ar action
.Op Ar argument ...
.Nm
.Cm trace show
.Op Fl -jsonl
.Op Ar latest | file
.Nm
.Cm trace explain
.Op Ar latest | file
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a least-privilege execution runtime for AI agents and other autonomous
software.
It reads a TOML policy, evaluates capability decisions, filters the child
environment, prepares the strongest available filesystem sandbox, runs the
permitted command, and appends structured JSONL trace events.
.Pp
The current runtime enforces process policy and environment filtering on every
platform.
On Linux it also uses Landlock to enforce filesystem read and write grants when
the policy can be represented as granted path trees.
When
.Va net.deny
contains
.Qq * ,
Linux runs also create a fresh network namespace for deny-all egress.
On non-Linux hosts, filesystem policy is diagnostic only and
.Nm
prints a warning before spawning the command.
.Pp
Network host allowlists, browser-control, and secret-broker enforcement are
planned beyond the current stdio MCP proxy milestone.
.Sh COMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm doctor Op Fl p Ar policy
Report the current local runtime status for
.Ar policy .
The report includes operating system, policy path, trace path, process rules,
environment filtering, configured MCP servers, sandbox backend, filesystem
enforcement status, network enforcement status, and policy warnings.
The default policy path is
.Pa nobody.toml .
.It Xo
.Cm init
.Op Fl -profile Ar name
.Op Fl o Ar output
.Op Fl -force
.Xc
Write a starter
.Pa nobody.toml
policy.
If
.Fl -profile
is omitted,
.Nm
detects Rust, Node, or Python project files and otherwise uses the
.Qq readonly-review-agent
profile.
The output path defaults to
.Pa nobody.toml .
Existing files are not overwritten unless
.Fl -force
is passed.
.It Cm init Fl -list-profiles
List built-in profiles.
.It Xo
.Cm mcp proxy
.Ar server
.Op Fl p Ar policy
.Fl -
.Ar command
.Op Ar argument ...
.Xc
Run
.Ar command
as an MCP stdio server and mediate JSON-RPC
.Qq tools/call
messages for
.Ar server .
Tool calls are checked against
.Va [mcp.<server>]
policy before forwarding.
Denied calls are not forwarded and receive JSON-RPC error responses when the
request has an id.
.It Xo
.Cm run
.Op Fl p Ar policy
.Fl -
.Ar command
.Op Ar argument ...
.Xc
Run
.Ar command
under
.Ar policy .
The default policy path is
.Pa nobody.toml .
If the requested process is denied, the command is not spawned.
The denial is still recorded as a completed failed run in the trace.
.It Cm policy check Op Ar policy
Parse
.Ar policy
and report the trace path, process rules, filesystem grants, network mode,
environment filtering shape, and policy warnings.
The default policy path is
.Pa nobody.toml .
.It Xo
.Cm policy simulate
.Op Ar policy
.Fl -
.Ar action
.Op Ar argument ...
.Xc
Evaluate a single policy action without running a command.
Supported action forms are:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "net.connect host:port" -compact
.It Cm process.exec Ar program Op Ar argument ...
.It Cm env.read Ar name
.It Cm fs.read Ar path
.It Cm fs.write Ar path
.It Cm net.connect Ar host:port
.It Cm mcp.tool Ar server Ar tool
.El
.It Xo
.Cm trace show
.Op Fl -jsonl
.Op Ar latest | file
.Xc
Read trace events.
The default target is
.Cm latest ,
which reads
.Pa .nobody/runs/latest.jsonl
and shows only the last run in that append-only file.
With
.Fl -jsonl ,
print selected events as newline-delimited JSON instead of the compact terminal
view.
.It Cm trace explain Op Ar latest | file
Explain trace events as a run summary and readable timeline.
The default target is
.Cm latest .
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -profile Ar name
Select an
.Cm init
profile.
Built-in profiles are
.Qq rust-coding-agent ,
.Qq node-coding-agent ,
.Qq python-coding-agent ,
.Qq readonly-review-agent ,
and
.Qq ci-agent .
.It Fl o , Fl -output Ar file
Write
.Cm init
output to
.Ar file .
.It Fl -force
Allow
.Cm init
to replace an existing output file.
.It Fl -list-profiles
List built-in profiles and exit.
.It Fl p , Fl -policy Ar file
Read policy from
.Ar file .
Used by
.Cm doctor ,
.Cm mcp proxy ,
and
.Cm run .
.It Fl -jsonl
Print trace events as JSONL.
Used by
.Cm trace show .
.It Fl h , Fl -help
Show command help.
.It Fl V , Fl -version
Show the program version.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Nm
does not require special environment variables.
.Pp
The parent environment is evaluated against the policy's
.Va env
table before the child process starts.
If
.Va env.clear
is true, the child receives only variables that match
.Va env.allow
and do not match
.Va env.deny .
If
.Va env.clear
is false, variables are inherited unless denied.
.Pp
.Ev PATH
controls normal operating-system command lookup for the child process.
.Ev HOME
is used when policy matching compares
.Pa ~/...
patterns with expanded home-directory paths.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa nobody.toml
Default policy file.
.It Pa .nobody/runs/latest.jsonl
Default append-only trace file.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It 0
The command or inspection operation completed successfully.
.It Ar n
.Cm run
exits with the child command's non-zero exit status when the command starts and
then fails.
.It 1
The policy could not be read, policy evaluation denied the requested process,
the trace could not be read, sandbox preparation failed, or the child terminated
without an ordinary exit code.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal
nobody doctor
nobody init --profile rust-coding-agent
nobody init --list-profiles
nobody mcp proxy github --policy nobody.toml -- github-mcp-server
nobody run -- echo hello
nobody run --policy nobody.toml -- echo hello
nobody policy check nobody.toml
nobody policy simulate nobody.toml -- fs.read .env
nobody policy simulate nobody.toml -- fs.write README.md
nobody policy simulate nobody.toml -- process.exec curl
nobody policy simulate nobody.toml -- net.connect github.com:443
nobody policy simulate nobody.toml -- mcp.tool github issue.read
nobody trace show latest
nobody trace show latest --jsonl
nobody trace explain latest
.Ed
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
Common diagnostics include:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Qq invalid TOML policy
The policy file parsed as invalid TOML or used an unknown field.
.It Qq process denied by policy
The requested command matched
.Va process.deny
or did not match a non-empty
.Va process.allow .
.It Qq trace is empty
.Cm trace show
or
.Cm trace explain
read a trace file with no events.
.It Qq Landlock filesystem enforcement is only available on Linux
The host selected the diagnostic no-op sandbox backend.
.It Qq cannot enforce fs.deny
Linux Landlock cannot express a deny carve-out below an already-granted path.
Grant narrower read/write paths instead.
.It Qq MCP tool is explicitly denied
.Cm mcp proxy
blocked a
.Qq tools/call
request before forwarding it to the MCP server.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr nobody-trace 5 ,
.Xr nobody.toml 5 ,
.Xr nobody-policy 7 ,
.Xr nobody-sandbox 7
