.Dd May 11, 2026
.Dt NOBODY-SANDBOX 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nobody-sandbox
.Nd sandbox backend behavior for nobody
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Xr nobody 1
prepares a sandbox before spawning the requested command.
The selected backend is recorded in the trace as
.Va sandbox.prepared .
The same backend preparation is reported by
.Cm nobody doctor
so users can see whether the selected policy is enforceable on the current
host before running an agent.
.Pp
The current sandbox boundary is filesystem-focused, with deny-all network
egress primitives on Linux and macOS.
Process policy and environment filtering happen in the runtime before spawn.
Host allowlists, browser, and secret enforcement are not sandboxed yet.
MCP tool calls are mediated separately by
.Xr nobody 1
when traffic is routed through
.Cm mcp proxy .
.Sh LINUX LANDLOCK
On Linux,
.Nm
uses Landlock as the default filesystem backend.
The runtime resolves policy paths relative to the current working directory,
adds read and write grants, and installs the Landlock rules in the child after
fork and before exec.
The parent runtime remains outside the child sandbox so it can write trace
events and supervise the process.
.Pp
The backend requires fully enforced Landlock ABI v3 filesystem rights.
If the kernel or host configuration reports partial enforcement, no
enforcement, or no Landlock support, the run fails.
The failure is recorded as
.Va sandbox.prepare.failed
followed by a failed
.Va run.completed
event.
.Pp
Read support paths are added for command startup and dynamic linking.
The backend derives paths from
.Ev PATH
and common system locations such as
.Pa /bin ,
.Pa /usr ,
.Pa /lib ,
and selected device files.
Policy read/write grants are still the application-specific boundary.
.Sh LINUX NETWORK NAMESPACE
On Linux, a policy with
.Va net.deny
containing
.Qq *
requests deny-all network enforcement.
The backend creates a fresh network namespace in the child before exec.
That namespace has no host routes, so outbound egress is blocked for the
process and descendants.
.Pp
This is not host allowlist enforcement.
Policies such as
.Va net.allow
=
.Qq github.com:443
are currently diagnostic until a later proxy or namespace bridge exists.
.Sh MACOS SEATBELT
On macOS,
.Nm
uses the system Seatbelt sandbox profile API, the same profile language used by
.Xr sandbox-exec 1 .
The runtime applies the generated profile in the child after fork and before
exec, preserving environment filtering and trace supervision in the parent.
.Pp
The profile imports
.Pa system.sb ,
denies by default, grants declared
.Va fs.read
and
.Va fs.write
paths, denies declared
.Va fs.deny
paths, and allows system read paths needed for command startup.
Unlike Linux Landlock, Seatbelt can express deny carve-outs below granted
paths, so this shape is enforceable on macOS:
.Bd -literal
[fs]
read = ["."]
deny = [".env"]
.Ed
.Pp
When
.Va net.deny
contains
.Qq * ,
the profile denies network operations for the child and descendants.
Host allowlists remain diagnostic.
.Sh PATH RULES
.Va fs.read
and
.Va fs.write
entries must resolve to existing paths on Linux.
On macOS, they must also resolve to existing paths.
Relative paths are resolved from the working directory.
.Pa ~/
paths are expanded with
.Ev HOME .
.Pp
.Va fs.deny
entries are normalized for carve-out checks.
Landlock is allowlist-based and cannot express
.Qq deny this child path below an allowed parent .
For example, this policy can be simulated:
.Bd -literal
[fs]
read = ["."]
deny = [".env"]
.Ed
.Pp
but it cannot be faithfully enforced by Landlock because
.Pa .env
sits under the granted current-directory tree.
On Linux,
.Xr nobody 1
fails closed with a
.Qq cannot enforce fs.deny
diagnostic.
Grant narrower paths instead.
.Sh OTHER HOSTS
On hosts other than Linux and macOS, the current backend is
.Qq noop .
It records
.Va enforced=false
and prints a warning:
.Bd -literal
nobody: WARNING: filesystem sandbox enforcement is not available on this platform; filesystem policy is diagnostic only
.Ed
.Pp
The command still runs after process policy and environment filtering have
succeeded.
.Sh LIMITATIONS
The current sandbox does not provide:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
network host allowlist enforcement;
.It
seccomp or namespace isolation beyond deny-all networking;
.It
MCP transports not routed through
.Cm nobody mcp proxy ;
.It
browser-control mediation;
.It
secret-broker mediation.
.El
.Sh TRACE
The
.Va sandbox.prepared
event records:
.Bl -tag -width "enforced" -compact
.It Va backend
Backend name, such as
.Qq landlock
,
.Qq sandbox-exec
or
.Qq noop .
.It Va enforced
Boolean enforcement status.
.It Va filesystem_enforced
Whether the filesystem boundary is active.
.It Va network_enforced
Whether network egress enforcement is active.
.It Va network_mode
Network backend mode, such as
.Qq deny-all
or
.Qq diagnostic .
.It Va warning
Backend warning, if any.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr nobody 1 ,
.Xr nobody-trace 5 ,
.Xr nobody.toml 5 ,
.Xr nobody-policy 7
